the housing market in Canada Australia
New Zealand and a few others barely took
a dip during the housing crisis it was a
breather and escalated way beyond that
home prices in the u.s. came down
significantly and allowed the
restoration of sanity to temporarily
resume since the financial crisis we
have witnessed historically low interest
rates which will absolutely keep this
bubble going but what happens when the
rates go up you came here for the truth
so let me unveil that for you today we
are going to have our focus specifically
on real estate prices I will show you
the indicators we need to look at that
will spell it out for you so let's get
into it right away as you see fears of
rising mortgage rates are about to
become a reality and some financial
institutions have already quietly raised
their discretionary rates and
potentially this is a harsh reality for
Canadian consumers grappling with
something I talk about all the time
near record that we had the subprime
mortgage crisis then we saw the whole
housing market essentially in the US
just come downward and we saw other
markets around the world affected by
this as well you saw Dubai in other
areas where an extreme drop in the price
occurred and that was all for a good
reason because the prices had increased
way too fast in such a short period of
time but then you look at areas like
Canada New Zealand Australia where yes
they did come down but the price was so
marginal it was barely even noticeable
so what has happened since is that you
see yes the u.s. real estate prices have
come up but they had declined
significantly previously so you have a
big separation now in between this
appreciation since the years following
the subprime mortgage crisis what you
have particularly in Canada is an
extreme amount of debt
consumers right now are at the most
amount of that they have ever been and
this can continue to some degree for the
foreseeable future I mean you have
record low interest rates so what an
individual does is they take the equity
out of their home that's being built up
because of low interest rates and they
are able to use it like a bank account
and that's what many people have done
this is full disclosure it's not
necessarily something that's kept or
swept under the rug this here is
something that's happening within Canada
but it's a policy that applies mostly
around the world many countries in fact
so let's get into this today beginning
right now with Royal Bank hikes mortgage
rates they were not the only bank to do
so you see this also with the Bank of
Montreal and CIBC like some of their
mortgage rates and they're doing so in
in fact in advance of the Bank of Canada
increasing their rates so the commercial
banks don't have to wait on the central
bank to increase rates at all but should
the central bank do so it's obviously
going to be something that snowballs
this is just a small amount of course
it's just the beginning we can see that
what has happened recently the Canadian
banks have suggested that they want to
cool down the market a little bit
because they say that okay we've
overextended ourselves we've increased
interest rates a marginal amount to try
and bring this back but what they also
do is they have they basically go
through a stress test so what they try
to do is yes if mortgage rates increase
to this percentage then will you be able
to afford it and that's how they sort of
try to determine if they're able to deal
with it now I don't think that
necessarily any of its real because you
can still see that people are able to
afford homes at higher mortgage rate and
that is not true
let's get into some of that
well today this is a number that I
discussed in my book 11.7 now while that
number continues to increase even when
it wrote about it in my book it was
actually quite extreme what we're
looking at is a house in Toronto cost
eleven point seven times the median
total family income think about that
family income back in the day I've said
that a house was affordable when it cost
three times your income three times so
if the household income was eighty
thousand dollars compared to now where
the household income is definitely in a
worse situation you have to figure that
this ratio continues to get worse in my
book I used the example of 1970
comparing that to most likely around
2010 or 2011 prices and you saw that it
was extremely bad now it has gotten way
worse since then so they're saying some
areas around Canada are not so bad but
look the major cities are not doing well
in this regard
Ottawa is saying that it's a little bit
cheaper Vancouver is much higher at 12.5
times the whole point is that it's
nowhere near realistic those in the
financial industry the Realtors everyone
else they're suggesting this can
continue as long as more people buy
homes but you have a very very
fundamental point that's not being
discussed and I'll hold on to that
thought for just a moment cuz I'll be
quoting that here almost three quarters
this is the big news today almost three
quarters of Canadian homeowners would
have difficulty paying their mortgage
every month if their payments increase
by as little 10% think about
that now while this is only surveying of
2,000 homeowners it's still significant
still very significant three quarters of
people in Canada wouldn't be able or
would have difficulty paying their
mortgage just by a 10% increase that
right there should be setting off alarm
bells it's not keep really kept on the
down-low
but this here as far as I'm concerned is
huge
such a small percent which can happen at
any time is what will affect it now
Manulife is a very large company in
Canada the CEO of many light bank said
this what these people don't realize is
that we're at record low interest rates
today and that's the point I've made to
you literally hundreds and hundreds of
times if we are at these very low levels
if it comes off not even to let's say a
high level but just a historic average
level average this would destroy the
entire housing it would bring the whole
economy down the only thing left in the
Canadian economy is housing and the
market interconnected with that this
would destroy people destroy people if
mortgage rates increased by as little as
one percentage point some borrowers
could be facing a hike of 10% on their
monthly bills 1% on their mortgage think
about that if somebody has a 3% mortgage
today because they got in at the right
time they were able to get that 3%
mortgage or even better we're looking at
rates not that long ago of 2.5 percent
2.5 percent moving up to 3.5% that's
historically very low but all of a
sudden that's the 10% this is so
significant
and even man new life the CEO of man you
like the thing hello we have a huge
problem here and what do they do to cool
the market basically nothing they are
struggling to increase the central
bank's main interest rate by a quarter
of a percent they can't even do that
they're suggesting that this is going to
happen at the next meeting but I mean
not even a quarter of a percent the rate
is at point five percent right now it's
basically free money for these banks and
just a quarter of a percent is scaring
them that's when you know you have a big
problem but this bubble is going to wipe
out a lot of people the longer you
continue the euphoria that's occurring
in real estate right now and you'll see
it in the comments of this video is
extreme in Toronto Vancouver other areas
in Canada right now and I know my
friends out there in Australia New
Zealand other areas speak up because
this is going on you've seen me you for
ian's people are going crazy right now
with real estate and they're sucking out
that equity that they've built up in
there because of all the pandemonium
which is happening and it's going to
hurt them even more this is a huge
mistake that people are making and
unfortunately you're going to have to
pay the price overall nearly one quarter
twenty four percent of Canadian
homeowners polled said they haven't been
able to come up with enough money to pay
a bill in the past year one quarter of
people and these are the same homeowners
that will suffer should prices increase
our interest rates increase by one
percent now day one if they increase
mortgage rates by one percent what's
going to happen nothing but inevitably
people have to refinance and a lot of
these people are in fact on variable
mortgages it will hurt them
there's a lot of people on the AR ms
adjustable rate mortgages this you know
people suggest that you know I'll just
move my money out or go to a fixed but
it's quickly going to be a problem
people and even if they do get a fixed
mortgage three years five years it's
going to have to happen the mortgage
rates probably aren't going to go down
anytime soon should they decide to
increase them or we can take the devil's
advocate approach and if they do in fact
decrease them the bubble will continue
and we know how that hurts in long term
overall this is a you know that the same
piece of information but over half of
those polled had less had $5,000 or less
set aside to deal with the financial
emergency while one fifth of them have
nothing saved for a rainy day it shows
it really shows you that when we have
this problem sooner or later interest
rates are going to rise you know it's
it's a matter of fact we are going to
have this big problem it's coming it's
you know the waves are crashing in here
it is when I don't know you ask the
central bankers when they're going to
decide to increase mortgage rates ask
those CEOs of all the big banks when
they're going to decide to do it when it
happens here comes the crash and this is
another chart you're basically just
showing you chart form what I was
talking about the percentage at which
this increase will cause a problem for
people and it doesn't take much that's
what the charts basically saying a small
increase will hurt people and then last
but not least the number of the
uninsured mortgages is on the rise in
Canada and the new risks are emerging
alongside these loans
that's according to none other in the
Bank of Canada you know they'd like to
pass it on the pain pass on the sort of
the blame to each other
the mortgage rates are at a historic low
and they say that we are doing this look
the rate at which the Bank of Canada
have are very low so we're passing on
the savings to you but then the Bank of
Canada says look your mortgage rates
mortgage rates are so low that you are
fueling a bubble
let me just pass it back and forth hot
potato the stats in here you know you
can read it for yourself if you're
interested it's it's very clear what's
happened too much of a bubble to low
interest rates
people are overextending themselves
they're in the highest amount of debt
ever eventually it's going to have to
pop eventually this bubble will destroy
a lot of people but if we increase
interest rates we are going to cause it
so we are in a dilemma like no other and
that's why I believe that they've kept
them this low for this long they're not
sure what to do the policy would be to
increase rates a few years ago but
politically that's really bad because an
increase in interest rates allows this
bubble to fuel people hold the money out
they buy cars they go to the restaurants
they buy this and that I see this to
become quite frankly one of the biggest
crisis that Canada will see I think it's
going to be a lot worse than what was
seen in the early 90s but the question
is what they're going to do about it
it's inevitable however if you found
this video informative please give me a
thumbs up if you hate it give me a
thumbs down if you don't like my face
give me a thumbs down if you think that
Janet Yellen is wonderful then give me a
thumbs down just give me a thumbs down
just for fun and last but not least if
you found this video informative I know
you will find my books the money GPS and
my new release global economic collapse
even more informative if you're
interested in real estate really
breaking it down what it all means these
rates that I've talked about everything
else then that's in my first book if you
want to know the relatively similar
issues but then getting into
how to reduce your monthly expenses
becoming self-sufficient and those type
of topics that's in my new book global
economic collapse so while they do have
some familiarity there is sort of
different topics so check those out at
Amazon the links are in the description
below
take care